RHDEVDOCS-3667 - OCP 4.10 Monitoring Release Notes (#42606)
openshift/openshift-docs: release_notes/ocp-4-10-release-notes.adoc

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring"]
=== Monitoring

The monitoring stack for this release includes the following new and modified features.

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-stack-components-and-dependencies"]
==== Monitoring stack components and dependencies

Updates to versions of monitoring stack components and dependencies include the following:

* Alertmanager to 0.23.0
* Grafana to 8.3.4
* kube-state-metrics to v2.3.0
* node-exporter to 1.3.1
* prom-label-proxy to 0.4.0
* Prometheus to 2.32.1
* Prometheus adapter to 0.9.1
* Prometheus operator to 0.53.1
* Thanos to 0.23.1

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-new-metrics-targets-page-in-web-console"]

> ==== New page for metrics targets in web console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== New page for metrics targets in the web console
```

Author: fixed

> A new *Metrics Targets* page in the {product-title} web console shows targets for default {product-title} projects and for user-defined projects. You can use this page to view, search, and filter the endpoints that are currently targeted for scraping, which helps you to identify and troubleshoot problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new *Metrics Targets* page in the {product-title} web console shows targets for default {product-title} projects and for user-defined projects. You can use this page to view, search, and filter the endpoints currently targeted for scraping, which helps you identify and troubleshoot problems.
```

> [id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-components-use-TLS-authentication-for-metrics"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-components-use-tls-authentication-for-metrics"]
```

Author: fixed

==== Monitoring components updated to use TLS authentication for metrics collection

> With this release, all monitoring components are now configured to use mutual TLS authentication rather than Bearer Token static authentication for metrics collection. This authentication method is more resilient when an outage occurs in the Kubernetes API. It also decreases the load on the Kubernetes API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this release, all monitoring components are now configured to use mutual TLS authentication, rather than Bearer Token static authentication, for metrics collection. TLS is more resilient to Kubernetes API outages, and decreases the load on the Kubernetes API.
```

> [id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-updated-cmo-to-use-global-TLS-profile"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-updated-cmo-to-use-global-tls-profile"]
```

Author: fixed

==== Cluster Monitoring Operator updated to use the global TLS security profile

With this release, the Cluster Monitoring Operator components now honor the global `tlsSecurityProfile` settings. 
The following components and services now use the TLS security profile:

* Alertmanager pods (ports 9092 and 9097).

> * `kube-state-metrics` pod (ports 8443 and 9443).

Reviewer 2: we have different format for components, example:
`kube-state-metrics`
Alertmanager
I think we should use the same format, same for others in this section

Author: fixed

* `openshift-state-metrics` pod (ports 8443 and 9443).
* `node-exporter` pods (port 9100).
* Grafana pod (port 3002).
* `prometheus-adapter` pods (port 6443).
* `prometheus-k8s` pods (ports 9092 and 10902).
* Thanos query pods (ports 9092, 9093 and 9094).
* Prometheus Operator (ports 8080 and 8443).
* `telemeter-client` pod (port 8443)

If you have enabled user-defined monitoring, the following pods now use the profile:

* `prometheus-user-workload` pods (ports 9091 and 10902).
* `prometheus-operator pod` (ports 8080 and 8443).

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-changes-to-alerting-rules"]
==== Changes to alerting rules

* *New*
** Added a `namespace` label to all Thanos alerting rules.

> ** Added the `openshift_io_alert_source=”platform”` label to all platform alerts. 

Reviewer 2: `openshift_io_alert_source=”platform”`
change to
`openshift_io_alert_source="platform"`
the difference is in the  double quotation mark `"`

Author: fixed

* *Changed*
** Renamed `AggregatedAPIDown` to `KubeAggregatedAPIDown`.
** Renamed `AggregatedAPIErrors` to `KubeAggregatedAPIErrors`.

> ** Removed the `HighlyAvailableWorkloadIncorrectlySpread` alert. This alert is no longer needed because the Cluster Monitoring Operator ensures hard anti-affinity for all monitoring components.

Reviewer 2: `ensures hard anti-affinity for all monitoring components` 
this is improper, it is only for "Alertmanager/Prometheus adapter/Prometheus/Thanos Querier"
also for components enabled user-defined monitoring, "Prometheus/Thanos Ruler"
please see from `Added hard anti-affinity rules and pod disruption budgets for certain components` section

Reviewer 2: @bburt-rh correct

** Improved the description of the `KubeMemoryOvercommit` alert.
** Excluded `ReadOnlyMany` volumes from the `KubePersistentVolumeFillingUp` alerts.
** Improved `NodeFilesystemSpaceFillingUp` alerts to make it consistent with the Kubernetes garbage collection thresholds.
** Extended `PrometheusOperator` alerts to include the Prometheus operator running in the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespace.
** Replaced the `ThanosSidecarPrometheusDown` and `ThanosSidecarUnhealthy` alerts by `ThanosSidecarNoConnectionToStartedPrometheus`.
** Changed the severity of `KubeletTooManyPods` from `warning` to `info`.

[NOTE]
=====
Red Hat does not guarantee backward compatibility for recording rules or alerting rules.
=====

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-changes-to-metrics"]
==== Changes to metrics

* Pod-centric cAdvisor metrics available at the slice level have been dropped.
* The following metrics are now exposed:
** `kube_poddisruptionbudget_labels`
** `kube_persistentvolumeclaim_labels`

> ** `kube_persistentvolume_labels metric`

Reviewer 2: `kube_persistentvolume_labels metric`
remove metric

Author: Removed this metric from the list

* Metrics with the name `kube_*annotation` have been removed from `Kube-state-metrics`.

[NOTE]
=====
Red Hat does not guarantee backward compatibility for metrics.
=====

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-hard-anti-affinity-rules"]

> ==== Added hard anti-affinity rules and pod disruption budgets for certain components

Reviewer 2: change `pod disruption budgets` to
`poddisruptionbudgets` is better, see from
```
# oc api-resources | grep poddisruptionbudgets
poddisruptionbudgets                  pdb                 policy/v1                                     true         PodDisruptionBudget
```

Author: changed per your suggestion

> With this release, hard anti-affinity rules and pod disruption budgets have been enabled for the following monitoring components to ensure no down time during patch upgrades:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this release, hard anti-affinity rules and pod disruption budgets have been enabled for the following monitoring components to reduce down time during patch upgrades:
```

Reviewer: Unless this feature really **ensures** no downtime, I'd moderate this by saying something like "reduce downtime" or "achieve no downtime". 

IBM SG: "down time, noun: Do not use. Use "downtime".

Author: fixed

* Alertmanager
+
[NOTE]
=====
As part of this change, the number of Alertmanager replicas has been reduced from three to two.
=====
+
* Prometheus adapter
* Prometheus
* Thanos Querier

If you have enabled user-defined monitoring, the following components also use these rules and budgets:

* Prometheus
* Thanos Ruler

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-alert-routing-user-defined-project-tech-preview"]
==== Alert routing for user-defined projects (Technology preview)

> This release introduces a Technology Preview feature in which an administrator can enable alert routing for user-defined monitoring. Users can then add and configure alert routing for their user-defined projects.

Author: fixed

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-alertmanager"]
==== Alertmanager

Access to the third-party Alertmanager web user interface from the {product-title} route has been removed.

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-prometheus"]
==== Prometheus

* The Prometheus adapter now uses the Thanos Querier API instead of the Prometheus API.

> * {product-title} cluster administrators can now configure audit logs for the Prometheus adapter.

Reviewer 2: `The Prometheus adapter now uses the Thanos Querier API instead of the Prometheus API.`
and
`{product-title} cluster administrators can now configure audit logs for the Prometheus adapter.`
they are for prometheus adapter, should be placed under new section `Prometheus Adapter`, not under `Prometheus`

Author: Created a new `Prometheus adapter` section and moved the items.

* {product-title} cluster administrators can now configure query logging for Prometheus.
* Access to the third-party Prometheus web user interface is deprecated and will be removed in a future {product-title} release.

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-thanos"]
==== Thanos Querier

> * Access to the third-party Thanos Querier  web user interface from the {product-title} route has been removed.

Author: fixed

> * The `/api/v1/labels`, `/api/v1/labels/*/values`, and `/api/v1/series` endpoints on the Thanos Querier tenancy port are now exposed.

Reviewer 2: `/api/v1/labels/*/values`
should be
`/api/v1/label/*/values`

** Replaced the `ThanosSidecarPrometheusDown` and `ThanosSidecarUnhealthy` alerts by `ThanosSidecarNoConnectionToStartedPrometheus`.
** Changed the severity of `KubeletTooManyPods` from `warning` to `info`.
** Enabled exclusion of specific persistent volumes from `KubePersistentVolumeFillingUp` alerts by adding the `alerts.k8s.io/KubePersistentVolumeFillingUp: disabled` label to a persistent volume resource.

[NOTE]
=====
Red Hat does not guarantee backward compatibility for recording rules or alerting rules.
=====

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-changes-to-metrics"]
==== Changes to metrics

* Pod-centric cAdvisor metrics available at the slice level have been dropped.
* The following metrics are now exposed:
** `kube_poddisruptionbudget_labels`
** `kube_persistentvolumeclaim_labels`
* Metrics with the name `kube_*annotation` have been removed from `kube-state-metrics`.

[NOTE]
=====
Red Hat does not guarantee backward compatibility for metrics.
=====

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-added-hard-anti-affinity-rules-and-poddistruptionbudgets"]
==== Added hard anti-affinity rules and poddisruptionbudgets for certain components

> With this release, hard anti-affinity rules and `poddisruptionbudgets` have been enabled for the following monitoring components to reduce down time during patch upgrades:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this release, hard anti-affinity rules and `poddisruptionbudgets` have been enabled for the following monitoring components to reduce downtime during patch upgrades:
```

Author: fixed

** Improved the description of the `KubeMemoryOvercommit` alert.
** Improved `NodeFilesystemSpaceFillingUp` alerts to make it consistent with the Kubernetes garbage collection thresholds.
** Excluded `ReadOnlyMany` volumes from the `KubePersistentVolumeFillingUp` alerts.
** Extended `PrometheusOperator` alerts to include the Prometheus operator running in the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespace.
** Replaced the `ThanosSidecarPrometheusDown` and `ThanosSidecarUnhealthy` alerts by `ThanosSidecarNoConnectionToStartedPrometheus`.
** Changed the severity of `KubeletTooManyPods` from `warning` to `info`.
** Enabled exclusion of specific persistent volumes from `KubePersistentVolumeFillingUp` alerts by adding the `alerts.k8s.io/KubePersistentVolumeFillingUp: disabled` label to a persistent volume resource.

[NOTE]
=====
Red Hat does not guarantee backward compatibility for recording rules or alerting rules.
=====

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-changes-to-metrics"]
==== Changes to metrics

* Pod-centric cAdvisor metrics available at the slice level have been dropped.
* The following metrics are now exposed:
** `kube_poddisruptionbudget_labels`

> ** `kube_persistentvolumeclaim_labels`

Reviewer 2: > kube_persistentvolume_labels metric
remove metric
I meant we should remove `metric`, should keep `kube_persistentvolume_labels`

* Metrics with the name `kube_*annotation` have been removed from `kube-state-metrics`.

[NOTE]
=====
Red Hat does not guarantee backward compatibility for metrics.
=====

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-added-hard-anti-affinity-rules-and-poddistruptionbudgets"]
==== Added hard anti-affinity rules and poddisruptionbudgets for certain components

> With this release, hard anti-affinity rules and `poddisruptionbudgets` have been enabled for the following monitoring components to reduce downtime during patch upgrades:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With this release, hard anti-affinity rules and pod disruption budgets have been enabled for the following monitoring components to reduce downtime during patch upgrades:
```

Author: fixed

** Enabled exclusion of specific persistent volumes from `KubePersistentVolumeFillingUp` alerts by adding the `alerts.k8s.io/KubePersistentVolumeFillingUp: disabled` label to a persistent volume resource.

[NOTE]
=====
Red Hat does not guarantee backward compatibility for recording rules or alerting rules.
=====

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-changes-to-metrics"]
==== Changes to metrics

* Pod-centric cAdvisor metrics available at the slice level have been dropped.
* The following metrics are now exposed:
** `kube_poddisruptionbudget_labels`
** `kube_persistentvolumeclaim_labels`
** `kube_persistentvolume_labels`
* Metrics with the name `kube_*annotation` have been removed from `kube-state-metrics`.

[NOTE]
=====
Red Hat does not guarantee backward compatibility for metrics.
=====

[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-added-hard-anti-affinity-rules-and-poddistruptionbudgets"]
==== Added hard anti-affinity rules and poddisruptionbudgets for certain components

With this release, hard anti-affinity rules and `poddisruptionbudgets` have been enabled for the following monitoring components to reduce downtime during patch upgrades:

* Alertmanager
+
[NOTE]
=====

> As part of this change, the number of Alertmanager replicas has been reduced from three to two.

Reviewer 3: should we link to "known issues" or state that if you've configured persistent storage for Alertmanager, you want to read the "known issues"?

Author: I'll point them to the Known Issues. We can't use internal cross-reference links.

Author: fixed

* In {product-title} 4.10, the non-sidecar `maven` and `nodejs` pod templates for Jenkins are deprecated. These pod templates are planned for removal in a future release. Bug fixes and support are provided through the end of that future life cycle, after which no new feature enhancements are made. Instead, with this update, you can run Jenkins agents as sidecar containers. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/JKNS-257[JKNS-257])

[id="ocp-4-10-third-party-monitoring-components-uis-deprecation"]
==== Third-party monitoring components user interface deprecation

For the following monitoring stack components, access to third-party web user interfaces (UIs) is deprecated and is planned to be removed in a future {product-title} release:

* Grafana
* Prometheus

> As an alternative, users can navigate to the *Observe* section of the {product-title} web console to access dashboard and other UIs for platform components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an alternative, users can navigate to the *Observe* section of the {product-title} web console to access dashboards and other UIs for platform components.
```

Author: fixed

You cannot upgrade {op-system-base} 7 compute machines to {op-system-base} 8. You must deploy new {op-system-base} 8 hosts, and the old {op-system-base} 7 hosts must be removed.

[id="ocp-4-10-third-party-monitoring-component-uis-removal"]
==== Third-party monitoring component user interface access removed

With this release, you can no longer access third-party web user interfaces (UIs) for the following monitoring stack components:

* Alertmanager
* Thanos Querier

> 

Reviewer 2: if enabled user workload monitoring, Thanos Ruler UI is also unavailable

Author: Added `Thanos Ruler (if user workload monitoring is enabled)` to the list

* Previously, filtering of virtual tables in the {console-redhat-com} was broken. Consequently, all of the available `nodes` would not appear following a search. This update includes new virtual table logic that fixes the filtering issue in the {console-redhat-com}. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1990255[*BZ#1990255*])

[discrete]
[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-bug-fixes"]
==== Monitoring

* Previously, during {product-title} upgrades, the Prometheus service could become unavailable because either two Prometheus pods were located on the same node or the two nodes running the pods rebooted during the same interval. 
This situation was possible because the Prometheus pods had soft anti-affinity rules regarding node placement and no pod disruption budget. 

> Consequently, metrics were not collected and rules were not evaluated over a period of time.

Reviewer 2: I think we should replace
`pod disruption budget` to `poddisruptionbudgets`

Author: changed to `poddisruptionbudget` throughout

Consequently, metrics would not be collected, and rules would not be evaluated until the node came back online.
+
With this release, the Cluster Monitoring Operator configures hard anti-affinity rules to ensure that the two Prometheus pods are scheduled on different nodes.
As a result, Prometheus pods are now scheduled on different nodes, and a single node outage no longer creates a gap in monitoring.(link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1949262[*BZ#1949262*])

* Previously, during {product-title} patch upgrades, the Alertmanager service might become unavailable because either the three Alertmanager pods were located on the same node or the nodes running the Alertmanager pods happened to reboot at the same time. 
This situation was possible because the Alertmanager pods had soft anti-affinity rules regarding node placement and no pod disruption budget. 
This release enables hard anti-affinity rules and pod disruption budgets to ensure no downtime during patch upgrades for the Alertmanager and other monitoring components. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1955489[*BZ#1955489*])

> * Previously, a false positive `NodeFilesystemSpaceFillingUp` alert was triggered when filesystem space was occupied by many Docker images. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Previously, a false positive `NodeFilesystemSpaceFillingUp` alert was triggered when the file system space was occupied by many Docker images. 
```

Reviewer: IBM SG: file system noun
Write as shown: two words.

Author: fixed

For this release, the threshold to fire the `NodeFilesystemSpaceFillingUp` warning alert is now reduced to 20% space available, instead of 40%, which stops the false positive alert from firing. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1987263[*BZ#1987263*])

> 

Reviewer 2: for bug 1987263, we have mentioned in Changed section
`Improved `NodeFilesystemSpaceFillingUp` alerts to make it consistent with the Kubernetes garbage collection thresholds.`
do we need to add it again here

Author: @simonpasquier Should we delete this bug fix because we mention it in Changed section for Alerts?

Reviewer 3: This section provides more details about the fix IMHO. And the same is true for other bug fixes (like the next one) as @juzhao mentions. I'd rather keep this section and remove the mention in the Changed section if needed.

Author: Keeping the section

* Previously, alerts for the Prometheus Operator component did not apply to the Prometheus Operator that runs the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespace when user-defined monitoring is enabled.
Consequently, no alerts fired when the Prometheus Operator that manages the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespace encountered issues.
+
With this release, alerts have been modified to monitor both the `openshift-monitoring` and `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespaces.
As a result, cluster administrators receive alert notifications when the Prometheus Operator that manages user-defined monitoring encounters issues. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2001566[*BZ#2001566*])

> 

Reviewer 2: same for bug 2001566, we have mentioned in the Changed section
`Extended PrometheusOperator alerts to include the Prometheus operator running in the openshift-user-workload-monitoring namespace.`

Author: @simonpasquier Should we delete this bug fix because we mention it in the Changed section for Alerts?

Author: keeping the section per Simon's previous comment

* Previously, if the number of daemon set pods for the `node-exporter` agent was not equal to the number of nodes in the cluster, the Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) would report a condition of `degraded`. This issue would occur when one of the nodes was not in the `ready` condition.
+
This release now verifies that the number of daemon set pods for the `node-exporter` agent is not less than the number of ready nodes in the cluster. This process ensures that a `node-exporter` pod is running on every active node.

> As a result, the CMO will not report a degraded condition if one of the nodes is not in a ready state. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2004051[*BZ#2004051*])

Reviewer 2: ready
->
Ready

* 

> This release fixes an issue in which some pods in the monitoring stack would start before TLS certificate-related resources were present, which resulted in failures and restarts. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2016352[*BZ#2016352*])

Author: fixed. Good catch!

* Previously, filtering of virtual tables in the {console-redhat-com} was broken. Consequently, all of the available `nodes` would not appear following a search. This update includes new virtual table logic that fixes the filtering issue in the {console-redhat-com}. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1990255[*BZ#1990255*])

[discrete]
[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-bug-fixes"]
==== Monitoring

* Previously, during {product-title} upgrades, the Prometheus service could become unavailable because either two Prometheus pods were located on the same node or the two nodes running the pods rebooted during the same interval. 
This situation was possible because the Prometheus pods had soft anti-affinity rules regarding node placement and no `poddisruptionbudgets`. 
Consequently, metrics were not collected and rules were not evaluated over a period of time.
+
To fix this issue, the Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) now configures hard anti-affinity rules to ensure that the two Prometheus pods are scheduled on different nodes.

> The CMO also provisions `poddisruptionbudgets` to ensure that at least one Prometheus pod is always running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CMO also provisions `poddisruptionbudgets` resources to ensure that at least one Prometheus pod is always running.
```

Author: fixed

As a result, a single-node outage no longer creates a gap in user-defined rule evaluation. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1955490[*BZ#1955490*])

* Previously, the Prometheus service would become unavailable when the two Prometheus pods were located on the same node and that node experienced an outage.
This situation occurred because the Prometheus pods had only soft anti-affinity rules regarding node placement.
Consequently, metrics would not be collected, and rules would not be evaluated until the node came back online.
+
With this release, the Cluster Monitoring Operator configures hard anti-affinity rules to ensure that the two Prometheus pods are scheduled on different nodes.
As a result, Prometheus pods are now scheduled on different nodes, and a single node outage no longer creates a gap in monitoring.(link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1949262[*BZ#1949262*])

* Previously, during {product-title} patch upgrades, the Alertmanager service might become unavailable because either the three Alertmanager pods were located on the same node or the nodes running the Alertmanager pods happened to reboot at the same time. 

> This situation was possible because the Alertmanager pods had soft anti-affinity rules regarding node placement and no pod disruption budget. 

Reviewer 2: pod disruption budget
->
poddisruptionbudgets

Reviewer 3: I would keep "pod disruption budget"

> This release enables hard anti-affinity rules and pod disruption budgets to ensure no downtime during patch upgrades for the Alertmanager and other monitoring components. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1955489[*BZ#1955489*])

Reviewer 2: pod disruption budgets
->
poddisruptionbudgets

Author: fixed

* Previously, a false positive `NodeFilesystemSpaceFillingUp` alert was triggered when the file system space was occupied by many Docker images. 
For this release, the threshold to fire the `NodeFilesystemSpaceFillingUp` warning alert is now reduced to 20% space available, instead of 40%, which stops the false positive alert from firing. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1987263[*BZ#1987263*])

* Previously, alerts for the Prometheus Operator component did not apply to the Prometheus Operator that runs the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespace when user-defined monitoring is enabled.
Consequently, no alerts fired when the Prometheus Operator that manages the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespace encountered issues.
+
With this release, alerts have been modified to monitor both the `openshift-monitoring` and `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespaces.
As a result, cluster administrators receive alert notifications when the Prometheus Operator that manages user-defined monitoring encounters issues. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2001566[*BZ#2001566*])

> * Previously, if the number of daemon set pods for the `node-exporter` agent was not equal to the number of nodes in the cluster, the Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) would report a condition of `degraded`. This issue would occur when one of the nodes was not in the `ready` condition.
> +
> This release now verifies that the number of daemon set pods for the `node-exporter` agent is not less than the number of ready nodes in the cluster. This process ensures that a `node-exporter` pod is running on every active node.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Previously, if the number of `daemonset` pods for the `node-exporter` agent was not equal to the number of nodes in the cluster, the Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) would report a condition of `degraded`. This issue would occur when one of the nodes was not in the `ready` condition.
+
This release now verifies that the number of `daemonset` pods for the `node-exporter` agent is not less than the number of ready nodes in the cluster. This process ensures that a `node-exporter` pod is running on every active node.
```

`daemonset` is a [kubernetes concept](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/daemonset/). Should it be used as such here?

Author: Thanks @jan--f. I'm changing it to DaemonSet, per the k8s usage and our usage elsewhere in the docs

Reviewer 3: to be pedantic, the Kubernetes docs say "DaemonSet".

* Previously, filtering of virtual tables in the {console-redhat-com} was broken. Consequently, all of the available `nodes` would not appear following a search. This update includes new virtual table logic that fixes the filtering issue in the {console-redhat-com}. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1990255[*BZ#1990255*])

[discrete]
[id="ocp-4-10-monitoring-bug-fixes"]
==== Monitoring

* Previously, during {product-title} upgrades, the Prometheus service could become unavailable because either two Prometheus pods were located on the same node or the two nodes running the pods rebooted during the same interval. 

> This situation was possible because the Prometheus pods had soft anti-affinity rules regarding node placement and no `poddisruptionbudgets` resources provisioned. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This situation was possible because the Prometheus pods had soft anti-affinity rules regarding node placement and no `PodDisruptionBudget` resources provisioned. 
```

Author: fixed

Consequently, metrics were not collected and rules were not evaluated over a period of time.
+
To fix this issue, the Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) now configures hard anti-affinity rules to ensure that the two Prometheus pods are scheduled on different nodes.

> The CMO also provisions `poddisruptionbudgets` resources to ensure that at least one Prometheus pod is always running.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The CMO also provisions `PodDisruptionBudget` resources to ensure that at least one Prometheus pod is always running.
```

Author: fixed

As a result, a single-node outage no longer creates a gap in user-defined rule evaluation. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1955490[*BZ#1955490*])

* Previously, the Prometheus service would become unavailable when the two Prometheus pods were located on the same node and that node experienced an outage.
This situation occurred because the Prometheus pods had only soft anti-affinity rules regarding node placement.
Consequently, metrics would not be collected, and rules would not be evaluated until the node came back online.
+
With this release, the Cluster Monitoring Operator configures hard anti-affinity rules to ensure that the two Prometheus pods are scheduled on different nodes.
As a result, Prometheus pods are now scheduled on different nodes, and a single node outage no longer creates a gap in monitoring.(link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1949262[*BZ#1949262*])

* Previously, during {product-title} patch upgrades, the Alertmanager service might become unavailable because either the three Alertmanager pods were located on the same node or the nodes running the Alertmanager pods happened to reboot at the same time. 

> This situation was possible because the Alertmanager pods had soft anti-affinity rules regarding node placement and no `poddisruptionbudgets` provisioned. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This situation was possible because the Alertmanager pods had soft anti-affinity rules regarding node placement and no `PodDisruptionBudget` provisioned. 
```

Author: fixed

> This release enables hard anti-affinity rules and `poddisruptionbudgets` resources to ensure no downtime during patch upgrades for the Alertmanager and other monitoring components. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1955489[*BZ#1955489*])

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This release enables hard anti-affinity rules and `PodDisruptionBudget` resources to ensure no downtime during patch upgrades for the Alertmanager and other monitoring components. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1955489[*BZ#1955489*])
```

Author: fixed

* For this release, monitoring stack components have been updated to use TLS authentication for metrics collection. However, sometimes Prometheus tries to keep HTTP connections to metrics targets open using expired TLS credentials even after new ones have been provided. Authentication errors then occur, and some metrics targets become unavailable. When this issue occurs, a `TargetDown` alert will fire. To work around this issue, restart the pods that are reported as down. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2033575[*BZ#2033575*])

* For this release, the number of Alertmanager replicas in the monitoring stack was reduced from three to two. However the persistent volume claim (PVC) for the removed third replica is not automatically removed as part of the upgrade process. After the upgrade, an administrator must remove this PVC manually from the Cluster Monitoring Operator. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2040131[*BZ#2040131*])

> 

Author: fixed

(link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2048062[*BZ#2048062*])

* During an upgrade of the monitoring stack, Prometheus and Alertmanager might become briefly unavailable. No workaround for this issue is necessary because the components will be available after a short time has passed. No user intervention is required. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2030539[*BZ#203059*])

* For this release, monitoring stack components have been updated to use TLS authentication for metrics collection. However, sometimes Prometheus tries to keep HTTP connections to metrics targets open using expired TLS credentials even after new ones have been provided. Authentication errors then occur, and some metrics targets become unavailable. When this issue occurs, a `TargetDown` alert will fire. To work around this issue, restart the pods that are reported as down. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2033575[*BZ#2033575*])

> * For this release, the number of Alertmanager replicas in the monitoring stack was reduced from three to two. However the persistent volume claim (PVC) for the removed third replica is not automatically removed as part of the upgrade process. After the upgrade, an administrator can remove this PVC manually from the Cluster Monitoring Operator. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2040131[*BZ#2040131*])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For this release, the number of Alertmanager replicas in the monitoring stack was reduced from three to two. However, the persistent volume claim (PVC) for the removed third replica is not automatically removed as part of the upgrade process. After the upgrade, an administrator can remove this PVC manually from the Cluster Monitoring Operator. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2040131[*BZ#2040131*])
```

Author: fixed
